# Dev Notes
Some things I learned about Rust (or in general) while working on this project.
## Ownership
<p>
One of the biggest annoyances I had with the original assignments were how much memory they leaked and the hours I spent trying to fix seg faults. I remember trying to valgrind A2 while dealing with a seg fault, and to my horror valgrind wasn't even able to function properly and reported some 10KB of memory lost. 

This experience was my original motivation to rewrite the final miniature OS in Rust. Advertisted as a "memory safe" alternative to C that was the future of systems, I had always wanted to write some Rust and get familiar with the language (I had written a small Chip8 emulator maybe a year back, but wanted a more in-depth project). I had also learned OCaml in my recent semester, and found functional programming's influence on Rust to be particularly interesting such as its closures and iterators.

SimpleShell implements a kernel that allows for the concurrent execution of some aribtrary amount of processes. In the original C design, pointers to PCBs are stored in three linked lists; `QUEUE` maintains a list of PCBs that are to be ran, `LRU_CACHE` maintains a list of pages, stored with most recently used at the head, and least recently used at the tail, and `ALL_PCB` maintains a list of all processes generated. The original starter code of some 5000 lines neglected to `free` much of the dynamically allocated objects, which lead to the enormous memory leaks I was seeing.
```C
typedef struct Kernel {
  LINKED_LIST *QUEUE;
  LINKED_LIST *LRU_CACHE;
  LINKED_LIST *ALL_PCB;
} Kernel
```
This design is impossible* to implement in Rust, as we must give *ownership* of the PCBs to one of the data structures. Rust ensures that memory doesn't leak by automatically dropping the PCBs when its owner goes out of scope. In our implementation, we give ownership of PCBs to the `all_pcb` HashMap, keyed by their PID, which we use in `lru_cache` and `process_queue`. Despite the availbility of `std::collections::LinkedList`, we instead utilize `VecDeque` as it provides the required operations of manipulating head and tail elements, and that it is "almost always better to use Vec or VecDeque because array-based containers are generally faster, more memory efficient, and make better use of CPU cache." 
```rust
struct Kernel {
  all_pcb: HashMap<usize, RefCell<PCB>>, //More on RefCell below
  process_queue: VecDeque<usize>, //PIDs
  lru_cache: VecDeque<(usize, usize)>, //PID, Page_index
  pid_counter: usize
}
```
> [!NOTE]
> In reality, it is possible to replicate the memory model of the original C implementation by wrapping the PCBs and PAGEs into smart pointers (such as `RefCell<T>`) and hand out those `RefCell`'s. However, this would introduce additional complexity to the project, and defeat the main purpose of using Rust in the first place, which is the gurantee of memory-safety at *compile time*. Using smart pointers such as `RefCell` instead moves the checks on borrows to *run time* and incurs a minor performance penalty, which is not ideal.
### Self-referential structs
Initially, I came up with the idea giving ownership of the PCBs to `all_pcb`, and storing references to the PCBs and PAGEs in `lru_cache` and `process_queue` in order to avoid requiring a HashMap and needing to access it each time to perform an operation on a PCB.
```rust
struct Kernel<'a> {
  all_pcb: Vec<PCB>,
  process_queue: VecDeque<&'a mut PCB>,
  lru_cache: VecDeque<&'a mut PAGE>
}
```
However this type of self-referential structure is impossible in Rust, as it is considered inherently *unsafe*. Consider the following:
- Say that we try to *move* this self-referential struct. The borrow checker will not allow this, as moving the struct will change the underlying memory addresses to the PCBs and cause the references pointing to them to be invalid (because it would be pointing at the old location which is no longer vlaid becuse the PCB is no longer there)
- Now, say that we try to *drop* this self-referential struct. The borrow checker will also not allow this, as we are attempting to drop something that is still being referenced (by itself in this case). We reach a never-ending loop that makes it impossible to drop the struct, leading to a memory leak.
</p>

## Interior Mutability
<p>
While running a process, it is possible that we may need to do an LRU cache replacement. In order to run a process in the first place, we must first get the PCB that we wish to run from `all_pcb`. Since we may also need to modify the PCB while it's being ran, we take a mutable reference to it. 

This poses a challenge, since a cache replacement almost always requires modifying another PCB within from `all_pcb` (We must invalidate a page from another PCB). However since we have already taken a mutable reference to `all_pcb`, this is impossible.

To get around this, we need to achieve *interior mutability*, where we can mutate data despite having an immutable reference to it. This is achieveable in Rust through its various smart pointers such as `Rc` or `RefCell`. In our case, we choose `RefCell` as we desire single ownership and mutable or immutable references to it. (The other smart pointers do not provide mutable references)

```rust
let all_pcb = HashMap<usize, PCB>; //Original implementation
let mut pcb = all_pcb.get_mut(&pid1); //.get_mut takes a mutable borrow to all_pcb
//Some lines...
let mut victim_pcb = all_pcb.get_mut(&pid2); //PANIC!!, a mutable borrow to all_pcb already exists

let all_pcb = HashMap<usize, RefCell<PCB>>; //Modified implementation
let mut pcb = all_pcb.get(&pid1).unwrap().borrow_mut(); //.get takes a immutable borrow to all_pcb
//Some lines...
let mut victim_pcb = all_pcb.get(&pid2).unwrap().borrow_mut(); //we're fine!! (as long as we don't try to access the same RefCell....)
```

Instead of having to mutably borrow `all_pcb` in order to get mutable access to one of its PCBs, we can instead immutably borrow `all_pcb`, and get mutable access to the `RefCell<PCB>` through the interface provided by `RefCell`. 
>[!WARNING]
> While this achieves the behavior we want, we must also be careful to not get two mutable borrows to the same `RefCell`, as this will cause a panic at runtime. We have not circumvented the rules the borrow checker enforces (same rule of many immutable reference or one mutable reference applies), rather only moved it to *run time*. In our case, we simply check if `pid` is the same when getting `victim_pcb`
```rust
let mut pcb = all_pcb.get(pid).unwrap().borrow_mut();
//Some lines...
if victim_pid == pid { //Check if we are attempting to get the same pcb again
  //Operate on existing pcb
} else {
  let mut victim_pcb = all_pcb.get(victim_pid).unwrap().borrow_mut();
}
```

</p>

## Error handling & propagation

## Next Steps
Excited to get started on the A3 portion of emulating the ATA interface for a file system! 
